Hericium erinaceus (also called lion's mane mushroom, mountain-priest mushroom, bearded tooth fungus, and bearded hedgehog) is an edible mushroom belonging to the tooth fungus group. Native to North America, Europe, and Asia, it can be identified by its long spines (longer than 1 centimetre or 1⁄2 inch), occurrence on hardwoods, and tendency to grow a single clump of dangling spines. The fruit bodies can be harvested for culinary use.

H. erinaceus can be mistaken for other species of Hericium, which grow across the same range. In the wild, these mushrooms are common during late summer and fall on hardwoods, particularly American beech and maple. Usually H. erinaceus is considered saprophytic, as it mostly feeds on dead trees. It can also be found on living trees, so may be a tree parasite. This could indicate an endophytic habitat.

Description

The fruit bodies of H. erinaceus are large, irregular bulbous tubercules. They are 5–40 centimetres (2–15+1⁄2 inches) in diameter, and are dominated by crowded, hanging, spore-producing spines, which are 1–5 cm (1⁄2–2 in) long or longer.

The hyphal system is monomitic, amyloid, and composed of thin- to thick-walled hyphae that are approximately 3–15 μm (microns) wide. The hyphae also contain clamped septa and gloeoplerous elements (filled with oily, resinous substances), which can come into the hymenium as gloeocystidia.

The basidia are 25–40 µm long and 5–7 µm wide, contain four spores each and possess a basal clamp. The white amyloid spores measure approximately 5–7 µm in length and 4–5 µm in width. The spore shape is described as subglobose to short ellipsoid and the spore surface is smooth to finely roughened.

Development

The fruit bodies of H. erinaceus are mainly produced annually from August to November in Europe. It was observed that H. erinaceus could fruit intermittently for 20 years on the same dead tree. It is hypothesized that H. erinaceus can survive for 40 years. The mating system of H. erinaceus species found in the U.S. was shown to be bifactorially heterothallic.

The monokaryotic mycelium growth of H. erinaceus is slower than dikaryotic growth and only a relatively low percentage of monokaryotic cultures yield fruitbodies. Monokaryotic fruitbodies are also smaller than dikaryotic fruitbodies. The monokaryotic mycelium was found to produce fusoid to subglobose chlamydospores of 6–8 x 8–10 µm size. These spores can stay viable for more than seven years and be stored under anaerobic conditions. Chlamydospore germination requires 30 to 52 hours, with a germination success rate of 32 to 54%.

Spore production is highest at midday, relative to temperature increase and a decrease of relative humidity. Daily trends toward lower relative humidity can favor sporulation, however, levels of relative humidity that are too low do not favor high total spore production.
Mycochemistry

H. erinaceus contains diverse mycochemicals, including polysaccharides, such as β-glucan, as well as hericenones and erinacines. From its essential oil, 77 aroma and flavor compounds were identified, including hexadecanoic acid (26% of total oil composition), linoleic acid (13%), phenylacetaldehyde (9%) and benzaldehyde (3%), and other oils, such as 2-methyl-3-furanthiol, 2-ethylpyrazine and 2,6-diethylpyrazine. Low concentrations of ergosterol are present.

Similar species

Similar species include Hericium americanum and Hericium coralloides.